Cord Blood Levels Of IL-31 And CCL17 And Cutaneous
Markers May Predict Atopic Dermatitis Risk In Infants:
JAMA
Written By : Medha Baranwal | Medically Reviewed By : Dr. Kamal Kant Kohli
Published On 18 Sept 2024 6:45 PM | Updated On 19 Sept 2024 10:27 AM
Italy: A recent observational study published in JAMA Dermatology has shed light
on the potential for cord blood serum levels of specific cytokines to predict the
development of atopic dermatitis (AD) in infants.
Researchers investigated the correlation between serum levels of interleukin-31
(IL-31) and CCL17, as well as cutaneous markers and the subsequent emergence
of AD. The study suggests that measuring these cytokines at birth could provide
valuable insights into identifying newborns at higher risk for developing this
common skin condition.
"In this observational study, transepidermal water loss (TEWL) measurements at
the anterior cubital fossa were conducted before the onset of clinical signs of AD
and showed a correlation with the development of the condition," the researchers
wrote.
Atopic dermatitis, a chronic inflammatory skin disorder, affects a significant
number of infants and is characterized by symptoms such as itchy, inflamed skin.
Identifying early biomarkers for AD could enable earlier interventions and
potentially reduce the severity of the condition. Currently, there is no dependable
method to identify which newborns are at higher risk of developing atopic
dermatitis. Considering this, Angelo Massimiliano D’Erme, Unit of Dermatology,
Hospital of Livorno, Livorno, Italy, and colleagues aimed to assess the potential of
serological biomarkers—including CCL17 (thymus- and activation-regulated
chemokine), CCL18, CCL22, CCL27, IL-31, and thymus stromal lymphopoietin
—alongside transepidermal water loss (TEWL) and hydration rate, to predict AD
development in infants.
For this purpose, the researchers conducted an observational prospective study
involving 40 consecutive full-term newborns from a single university hospital in
Pisa, Italy. They assessed the cutaneous markers of these infants at 1, 6, and 12
months of age while analyzing biomarkers from a 10-mL sample of cord blood
taken at birth. Data collection was carried out from March to December 2018, with
analysis occurring between January and April 2019.
The study aimed to evaluate the levels of serological biomarkers to TEWL and
hydration rate and to determine their association with the development of atopic
dermatitis during the first year of life.
The study led to the following findings:
• All 40 included infants (68% males) completed the study. At six months,
16 infants presented symptoms and signs of AD (AD group) and 24 did not
(non-AD group).
• Infants with AD signs had statistically significant anterior cubital fossa
TEWL values at 1, 6, and 12 months of age compared to those without AD
signs.
• No statistically significant correlations were observed between the TEWL
measured at the anterior part of the knee and the hydration rate at the anterior
cubital fossa in the first month in the two groups.
• Regarding blood biomarkers, newborns who later developed atopic
dermatitis (AD) had significantly higher levels of CCL17/thymus- and
activation-regulated chemokine (median, 716 pg/mL) and IL-31 (median, 212
pg/mL) at birth compared to those who did not develop AD (median, 419
pg/mL for CCL17 and 97 pg/mL for IL-31).
• There were no statistically significant differences in the serum levels of
thymus stromal lymphopoietin (median, 105 pg/mL versus 88 pg/mL),
CCL18 (median, 1236 pg/mL versus 1255 pg/mL), CCL22 (median, 1032
pg/mL versus 1096 pg/mL), and CCL27 (median, 172 pg/mL vs 120 pg/mL)
between the two groups.
In the observational study, TEWL measurements at the anterior cubital fossa were
found to precede and correlate with the clinical signs of atopic dermatitis, offering
physicians an objective method to assess the risk in newborns and develop
additional preventive strategies.
"The analysis of cytokines revealed that measuring CCL17/TARC and IL-31
levels in cord blood could provide valuable insights into identifying newborns at
higher risk for AD. These innovative findings are anticipated to enhance the
stratification in future intervention studies," the researchers concluded.
Reference:
D’Erme AM, Fidanzi C, Bevilacqua M, et al. Cord Blood Serum Levels of IL-31
and CCL17, Cutaneous Markers, and Development of Atopic Dermatitis. JAMA
Dermatol. Published online September 11, 2024.