1. Introduction Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a chronic relapsing inflammatory skin disease characterized by dry skin, eczematous lesions, and pruritus [1]. Patients with AD also complain of a burden of sleep disturbance leading to anxiety, depression, and decreased quality of life [2]. Despite the efficacy of topical corticosteroids as an initial treatment for AD patients, their long-term use is associated with side effects and safety concerns, leading to poor adherence [3]. Therefore, the development of a new topical agent for AD is desirable. Although the pathogenesis of AD is multifactorial, it mainly involves the interaction of three factors: type 2 immune response, skin barrier dysfunction, and pruritus [4]. Recently, the role of phosphodiesterase 4 (PDE4), an enzyme that degrades intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), in the pathogenesis of AD has been demonstrated [5]. PDE4 is expressed in human keratinocytes and Langerhans cells [6]. Increased PDE4 activity and decreased intracellular cAMP levels are reported to lead to the production of inflammatory mediators [6]. Recently, PDE4 inhibition has been reported to decrease IL-4 production by basophils in an AD mouse model [7]. Difamilast, a topical PDE4 inhibitor, is now available in Japan for the treatment of adult and pediatric AD patients (aged ≥ 3 months). Phase III studies have shown a favorable efficacy and safety profile of difamilast treatment in AD [8], but the mechanism involved is still unclear. We previously showed that difamilast treatment increases the expression of filaggrin and loricrin, important molecules for skin barrier function, in human keratinocytes [5]. IL-33 is an IL-1 family cytokine reported to be expressed on keratinocytes, fibroblasts, vascular endothelial cells, dendritic cells, macrophages, and mast cells [9]. IL-33 is localized to the nucleus and is secreted following cell death, such as necrosis induced by scratching [10] and necroptosis induced by streptococcal infection [11]. Two types of isoforms of the IL-33 receptor, suppression of tumorigenicity 2 protein (ST2), have been identified: transmembrane ST2L and soluble ST2 (sST2) [12]. Binding of IL-33 to ST2L induces MyD88dependent activation of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) as intracellular signaling [12]. Since sST2 lacks an intracellular signaling domain, it is thought to be a decoy receptor to suppress inflammatory signaling induced by IL-33 [12]. Several studies have reported that the administration of sST2 suppresses IL-33-induced activation in mast cells [13] and group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) [14] and airway inflammation in a murine asthma model [15,16]. It has also been reported that repeated injection of IL-33 or overexpression of IL-33 in the skin leads to the development of AD-like skin inflammation in a mouse model [17]. In addition, mice lacking IL-33 in the epidermis did not develop severe AD-like skin lesions induced by MC903, avitamin Danalog[17]. The response of IL-33 to immune cells includes the stimulation of mast cells and ILC2s, which contribute to the production of type 2 cytokines such as IL-5 and IL-13 [17,18]. Th2 cells are also stimulated by IL-33, resulting in the production of IL-4 and IL-13 [17,18]. In addition, IL-33 decreases the expression of filaggrin and loricrin, contributing to skin barrier dysfunction [17,18]. Furthermore, IL-33 sensitizes sensory nerves to cause intense pruritus, which contributes to scratching behavior [19]. IL-33 is also reported to be highly expressed in the nuclei of keratinocytes in human AD lesions [20]. These findings suggest that IL-33 plays an important role in the pathogenesis of AD and that the inhibition of IL-33 activity will be beneficial for the treatment of AD. Against this background, we hypothesized that difamilast treatment could modulate IL-33 activity in AD. Cultured normal human epidermal keratinocytes (NHEKs) have been utilized to evaluate the pharmacological potential of new active ingredients for adjunctive treatment of ADemploying in vitro models [21]. Keratinocytes, a major component of the epidermis, play animportantrole inpolarizing the immuneresponsetowardstheTh2allergicresponse, such as in AD[21]. In addition, the use of a single cell type allows evaluation of the specific keratinocyte response. In situations where AD is becoming milder, since lesions and normal skin are interspersed with each other, and it is difficult to clearly distinguish the area of topical application, the topical site of difamilast includes the normal skin. Therefore, it is important to analyze the effects of difamilast on normal skin in order to obtain a better understanding of the pathogenesis and treatment of AD. Based on this background, we analyzed the expression of IL-33, ST2L, and sST2 in NHEKs treated with difamilast. 2. Results 2.1. Difamilast Treatment Produced sST2 in NHEKs We previously showed that difamilast treatment (1 or 5 µM) induces an increase in intracellular cAMP levels and phosphorylation of cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) without cell toxicity [5]. In this study, we treated NHEKs with difamilast (5 µM) for 3, 6, or 24 h and found that such treatment increased sST2 mRNA and protein levels at 6 and 24 h (Figure 1A,B). We also confirmed that difamilast treatment increased sST2 protein level at 1 µM and sST2 mRNA and protein levels at 5 µM (Figure 1C,D). In addition, we examined the mRNAandprotein levels of IL-33 and ST2L. We did not observe any significant changes in IL-33 and ST2L expression in NHEKs treated with difamilast 2.2.DifamilastTreatmentInhibitedIL-33ActivityviasST2ProductionbyNHEKs WefurtherinvestigatedwhetherthesST2producedinthesupernatantbydifamilast treatmentcouldsuppress theactivityof IL-33. WetreatedNHEKswitheither5µM difamilastorcontrolfor24handthencollectedthesupernatants.WethenstimulatedKU812 cells,ahumanbasophilcellline,withthesupernatantandIL-33(10ng/mL)(Figure2A). BasophilsareoneofthedirecttargetleukocytesforIL-33inallergicinflammationandTh2 polarizationsuchasAD[22].KU812cellsarereportedtoexpressST2LandIL-33activates bothNF-κBandMAPKpathways[23].StimulationwithIL-33for10,30,and60minwas usedtoevaluateNF-κBandMAPKphosphorylationbywesternblotting(Figure2B).The dataonwhichthedensitometricanalysisisbasedareshowninSupplementaryFigureS1. AsshowninFigure2B, thesupernatant fromdifamilast-treatedNHEKs inhibitedIL33-inducedNF-κBandJNKphosphorylationinKU812cells. IL-33stimulationdidnot inducep38andERKphosphorylationinKU812cells,whichispartiallyconsistentwitha previousreport[23]. IL-33hasbeenreportedtoupregulateTNF-α,IL-5,IL-13,andIL-4 inhumanbasophils[22–24].Weobservedthatthesupernatantfromdifamilast-treated NHEKsinhibitedtheupregulationofTNF-αinducedbyIL-33stimulationfor1handthe upregulationofIL-5andIL-13inducedbyIL-33stimulationfor3h(Figure2C).These resultssuggestthatdifamilasttreatmentmayinhibitIL-33activityviasST2production byNHEKs. 2.3.DifamilastTreatmentInhibitedIL-33ActivityviasST2ProductionbyNHEKs WefurtherinvestigatedthemechanismbywhichdifamilasttreatmentinducessST2 productioninNHEKs. SincewepreviouslyshowedthatPDE4inhibitionbydifamilast treatment inducesCREBphosphorylation[5],weanalyzeddifamilast-treatedNHEKs transfectedwithsiRNAofCREB.AlthoughCREBwassuccessfullyknockeddownby siRNAtransfection(SupplementaryFigureS2A), thisknockdowndidnot reversethe increasesofsST2mRNAandproteinlevelsinducedbydifamilasttreatment(5µM)for24h (Figure3A,B). SincePDE4inhibitionbyroflumilastandcAMPstimulationreportedlyinducedthe nucleartranslocationofarylhydrocarbonreceptor(AHR),aligand-activatedtranscription factor[25,26],weexaminedwhetherdifamilasttreatmentaffectedtheintracellularlocalizationofAHRinNHEKs.WeobservedthecytoplasmicexpressionofAHRincontrol-treated NHEKsandthenuclearexpressionofAHRindifamilast(5µM)-treatedNHEKsfor24h indicating that difamilast treatment induces the nuclear translocation of AHR in NHEKs (Figure 3C). We also confirmed that difamilast treatment did not alter the mRNA levels of AHR(Figure 3D). To further investigate the effect of difamilast treatment on AHR signaling, wemeasuredmRNAlevelsofCYP1A1,aclassicalAHRdownstreamgene[27],indifamilast (5 µM)-treated NHEKs for 24 h. Consistent with a previous report [25], difamilast treatment downregulated rather than upregulated CYP1A1 (Figure 3E). Because it has been reported that AHR and AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) do not form a complex when AHR is driven to the nucleus by the elevation of cAMP [25,26], we examined whether ARNT coprecipitates with AHR in difamilast-treated NHEKs. We treated NHEKs with 5 µM difamilast or 0.5 µM tapinarof, an AHR modulator [27], or control for 1 h. We performed a co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) assay to pull down the AHR–ARNT complexes. As shown in Figure 3F, ARNT did not coprecipitate with AHR in difamilast-treated NHEKs, but it did in tapinarof-treated ones. We speculated that the reason why cAMP-induced activation of AHRsignaling does not increase CYP1A1 expression is that AHR translocated into the nucleus by cAMP does not form a complex with ARNT, which is required for CYP1A1 expression [28,29]. Since we found that difamilast induced the nuclear translocation of AHR, we examined whether AHRwasinvolvedinthemechanismofsST2productionindifamilast-treated NHEKs. Wetransfected NHEKs with siRNAof AHRandthentreated them withdifamilast (5 µM) for 24 h. Knockdown of AHR was confirmed by qRT-PCR and western blotting (Supplementary Figure S2B). We observed that knockdown of AHR by siRNA transfection abolished the increases in mRNA levels of sST2 induced by difamilast treatment (Figure 3G) and is likely to attenuate the increases in protein levels of sST2 induced by difamilast treatment (Figure 3H), suggesting that difamilast treatment produced sST2 via AHRinNHEKs. 2.4. Difamilast Treatment Produced sST2 via the AHR–NRF2 Axis in NHEKs We previously showed that AHR is a sensor of nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2) activation, which is a master switch of cytoprotective gene expression [30]. To determine whether NRF2 was also involved in the mechanism by which difamilast treatment produced sST2 via AHR, we examined whether difamilast treatment affected the nuclear translocation of NRF2 using immunohistochemical staining analysis. We observed the cytoplasmic expression of NRF2 in control-treated NHEKs and the nuclear expression of NRF2indifamilast-treated (5 µM) NHEKs for 24 h (Figure 4A), indicating that difamilast induces the nuclear translocation of NRF2 in addition to AHR. We also confirmed that difamilast (5 µM) treatment for 6 h increased the activity of antioxidant responsive element (ARE) (Figure 4B), an NRF2 binding site [30], in NHEKs transfected with ARE-luciferase vector, indicating that difamilast treatment activates NRF2. Since NRF2 activation is also induced by the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) [30], we examined whether difamilast treatment (5 µM) for 24 h affected ROS production in NHEKs. Difamilast treatment did not increase ROS production compared with that in the control. BaP was used as a positive control for ROS production in NHEKs [30] (Supplementary Figure S3). To clarify whether AHR is involved in the nuclear translocation of NRF2 induced by difamilast treatment, we measured the nuclear expression of NRF2 in difamilast-treated NHEKstransfected with siRNA of AHR. Difamilast treatment increased the nuclear expression of AHR at 15 min and the nuclear expression of NRF2 at 30 min. Furthermore, transfection of AHR siRNA abolished the difamilast-induced nuclear expression of AHR and NRF2(Figure 4C), suggesting that difamilast treatment activates the AHR–NRF2 axis in NHEKs. Wenext examined the involvement of NRF2 in the mechanism by which difamilast treatment produced sST2. Knockdown of NRF2 abrogated the increases in sST2 mRNA and protein levels induced by difamilast (5 µM) for 24 h (Figure 4D,E), indicating that difamilast treatment also produced sST2 via NRF2. The knockdown of NRF2 was confirmed via PCR firmed via PCR and western blotting (Supplementary Figure S2). These findings suggest that difamilast treatment produces sST2 via the AHR–NRF2 3.Discussion ThisstudyshowedthatdifamilasttreatmentproducedsST2inNHEKs. Ithasbeen reportedthatsST2isexpressedintheepidermisofnormal skinanditsexpressionis furtherincreasedinBehçet’sdisease[31].However,fewreportedstudieshaveexamined sST2expressioninhumankeratinocytesininvitromodels.Primaryculturesofhuman keratinocytes,melanocytes, andfibroblastshavelowlevelsofsST2expressioninthe absenceofstimulation[32].AlthoughthemechanismofsST2productioninepithelialcells remainslargelyunknown,murinesquamouscellcarcinomacellswithnuclearexpressionof focaladhesionkinase(FAK),akinaseinvolvedintumorcellgrowth,havebeenreportedto producesST2,suggestingthatFAKisassociatedwiththetranscriptionfactorsthatregulate sST2expression[33]. Inaddition,sST2productionisinducedbyIL-1a,IL-1b,andTNF-a stimulationandinhibitedbyNF-κBinhibitorinalveolarepithelialcells,suggestingthat NF-κB activation is involved in the above-mentioned mechanism [32]. We found that the knockdown of NRF2 significantly suppressed the production of sST2 in NHEKs, clarifying the involvement of NRF2 in the mechanism of sST2 production. Since difamilast treatment did not increase ROS production, we believe that NRF2 was activated via AHR without oxidative stress. It has also been reported that IL-1a, IL-1b, and TNF-a produce ROS [34,35], which triggers the nuclear translocation of NRF2 [36], resulting in the production of sST2. Difamilast treatment produced sST2 but hadnoeffect onST2LexpressionatthemRNA and protein levels. There are two promoters in the ST2 gene, a proximal promoter and a distal one, both of which affect sST2 and ST2L mRNA expression. The proximal promoter controls the expression of sST2, while the distal promoter is involved in the expression of both sST2 and ST2L [12]. It is thus possible that NRF2 translocated into the nucleus by difamilast treatment increased the expression of sST2 through the proximal promoter. Since difamilast treatment induces CREB phosphorylation [5], we knocked down CREB and found that this increased sST2 production. These results indicate that CREB has a suppressive effect on the transcriptional activity of sST2 expression, suggesting that sST2 production by NHEKs may be balanced by NRF2 and CREB. We found that sST2 produced by difamilast-treated NHEKs inhibited the IL-33induced phosphorylation of NF-κB and MAPK in KU812 cells. As mentioned above, basophils are one of the target immune cells activated by IL-33 [22] and regulate and induce chemotaxis of other inflammatory cells, further promoting the process of allergic skin inflammation [37]. Since IL-33 reportedly induces the upregulation of TNF-α, IL-5, IL-13, and IL-4 via NF-κB and MAPK activation [23], we measured the gene expression and found the inhibitory effect of difamilast on IL-33-induced upregulation of TNF-α, IL-5, and IL-13 (Figure 2C). TNF-α induces spongiosis in human skin equivalents, increases thymic stromal lymphopoietin secretion by keratinocytes, and alters the expression of early and terminal differentiation proteins, contributing to skin barrier dysfunction [38]. TNF-α also sensitizes nociceptive nerve endings via TNF-α receptors and increases their responsiveness [39], resulting in intense pruritus. IL-5 is one of the Th2 cytokines involved in the differentiation, maturation, migration, development, survival, trafficking, and effector function of eosinophils, in addition to basophils and mast cells. IL-5-producing Th2 lymphocytes are reportedly increased in the peripheral blood and AD lesions, resulting in the infiltration of eosinophils [40]. It has been shown that IL-33 promotes IL-5 production in KU812 cells, which is suppressed by sST2 administration [41]; this is consistent with our results. Basophils are an important source of IL-13 in pruritic skin diseases [42]. It has also been reported that IL-33 can modulate the activity of basophils in IgE-dependent and IgE-independent manners [43]. These findings suggest that the capacity of difamilast to inhibit IL-33-induced upregulation of TNF-α, IL-5, and IL-13 may contribute to improving the disease activity of AD. IL-33 has also been reported to be elevated in dry skin pruritus [19]. IL-33 causes pruritus via ST2L on sensory neurons in animal models of dry skin. In addition, IL-33 enhances histaminergic pruritus in sensory neurons [19]. Apossible mechanism for this is that IL-33 promotes pruritus via a pathway involving IL-13 production, which may enhance histamine-induced pruritus [19]. These findings suggest that difamilast treatment may be effective against pruritus in AD and dry skin by interfering with IL-33 activity (Figure 5). This study is limited by the fact that the experimental results were obtained in vitro, so further analyses in animal models of AD and clinical specimens from patients with AD are required. It has been suggested that sST2 enhances IL-33 activity through the formation of the sST2–IL-33 complex in vivo [44]. It is thus possible that the suppression of IL-33 signaling by sST2 adversely affects the pathogenesis of AD, but further studies of this issue are needed. In conclusion, this study revealed a novel mechanism of difamilast, which supports its clinical efficacy in the treatment of AD. 