Introduction
Atopic dermatitis is a challenging, chronic, relapsing
inflammatory skin condition that is often accompanied by
additional atopic symptoms such as food allergies, allergic
rhinitis and asthma.1,2 Atopic dermatitis is assumed to include
hereditary as well as environmental factors that precipitate
the development and progression of this disease, however
the exact aetiology of the disorder is still unclear. Among
the immunologic factors contributing to the multifactorial
aetiology of atopic dermatitis are alterations related to
membrane malfunction, cellular-mediated immune responses
and type 1 IgE malfunction.3,4
Investigations have demonstrated that skin barrier breakdown
and immunological imbalance lead to the development
of atopic dermatitis.5 It is primarily a T cell-driven illness
since it has elevated levels of cytokines like interleukins
and chemokine ligand 18 (CCL18). In addition, there is
stimulation of cytokine pathways like Th22, Th17/IL-23 and
Th1. DNA methylation is another potential factor that causes
atopic dermatitis- [Figure 1].
Epidermal abnormalities in individuals with atopic
dermatitis were linked to altered gene transcript levels
according to an epigenome-wide association analysis in adult
atopic dermatitis patients.6 Significant variations in DNA
methylation were also found at a total of 19 CpG sites. By
demethylating the promoters of the IL-13 and IL-4 genes,
GATA3 transcription factor activation in Th2 cells causes the
production of IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13 [Figure 2].7
One of the distinctive features of this phenomenon is the
propensity for CD4 cells to develop into cells belonging
to the Th2 line. In peripheral blood and tissues, cytokines
induce IgE antibodies and eosinophils.8 This inflammation
damages the epidermal barrier.
Mechanism of Action
The JAK-STAT pathway leading to downstream activation
triggers the production of several cytokines. Interleukin [IL]-
13, IL-4, IL-31 and IL-5 are examples of proinflammatory
cytokines that work via this signal transduction channel
which serves as a connector between the nucleus and the cell
membrane. Mammals have four Janus kinases (JAK1, JAK2,
JAK3 and tyrosine kinase 2) and seven STATs (STAT1,
STAT2, STAT3, STAT4, STAT5a, STAT5b and STAT6)
[Figure 3]. When ligands attach to cellular receptors leading
to JAK-STAT activation, it stimulates genetic transcription in
the nucleus. As a result, Janus kinase suppression may reduce
pro-inflammatory cytokine signalling. In atopic dermatitis
mouse model studies, Janus kinase inhibitors demonstrated
an improvement in skin barrier functioning and a decrease in
inflammatory IL levels [Table 1].9,10
Topical JAK Inhibitors
Tofacitinib
Tofacitinib (TOFA), a JAK1 and JAK3 inhibitor implicated
in the Th1 and Th2 signalling pathways, was the first Janus
kinase inhibitor to go through substantial human research. A
4-week, phase 2a, double-blind, randomised study involving
69 adults aged 18–60 years found that 2% tofacitinib applied
twice daily significantly improved symptoms, leading to a
decrease in Eczema area and severity index (EASI) scores
of 81.7% as opposed to 29.9% with placebo.11 Nevertheless,
as opposed to 9% of control group patients, 17% of the
tofacitinib group suffered treatment-emergent side effects,
notably nasopharyngitis and upper respiratory tract infections.
Another study involving six patients with atopic dermatitis
who were resistant to standard therapy found that Scoring
Atopic Dermatitis (SCORAD) decreased by 24.3% over 21
weeks (p < 0.05). No notable side effects were reported.12
Ruxolitinib
Experiments involving transgenic IL-33 mouse models
demonstrated the ability of ruxolitinib cream (p < 0.01) in
decreasing both thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) and
fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-induced ear swelling (34%
and 39%, respectively), abnormal grooming behaviours due
to the inflammation and ear punch weight. Further research
revealed that it was due to the inhibition of IL-33 and Th-2
proteins. It was coupled with substantial inhibition of the
production of interferon signalling pathway mediators, such
as IFITM3 (interferon-induced transmembrane protein 3). On
histological investigation of tissue samples, ruxolitinib cream
significantly reduced the number of mast cells in contrast to
vehicle (placebo) cream, providing clear evidence for the
drug’s potent anti-inflammatory action.13
There have been numerous studies to establish the role of
ruxolitinib in treating atopic dermatitis. Under the registration
number NCT03011892,14 a phase 2 clinical research study
enrolling 307 adult atopic dermatitis patients was carried
out. An Investigator’s Global Assessment (IGA) score of 2
or 3 (mild or moderate) and 3–20% affected body surface
area were some of the inclusion parameters. Subjects were
randomly assigned to receive RUX (ruxolitinib) cream,
active control or vehicle control for 8 weeks. During the
second week, more people using 1.5% RUX twice daily
than those using 0.1% triamcinolone cream had reached
Clinically relevant improvement (CRI) and by the fourth 
week, near-maximal improvement had been seen. Within 36
hours of starting therapy, over 42.5% of those in the 1.5%
RUX group had a minimal clinically significant difference
(MCID) in pruritus (vehicle, 13.6%; P < 0.01). Patients
receiving 1.5% RUX cream BID demonstrated an increase in
Skindex-16 overall scores of 63.5% and 73.2%, respectively,
from baseline at weeks 2 and 8.
Kim et al.,15 in phase II research, administered ruxolitinib
cream to 252 patients for 4 weeks at four different dosages
(0.15% daily, 0.5% daily, 1.5% daily, or 1.5% twice daily), as
opposed to triamcinolone 0.1% cream and placebo. All RUX
regimens significantly alleviated the distressing symptoms by
week 4 with the 1.5% BID group demonstrating the biggest
improvement in EASI (71.6% vs. 15.5%; p < 0.0001).
The investigation offered strong proof of ruxolitinib’s
effectiveness with no significant side effects associated with
on-site treatment.
The topical ruxolitinib evaluation in atopic dermatitis
studies involved 631 and 618 patients respectively who were
randomly assigned to either apply 0.75% RUX cream, 1.5%
RUX cream or vehicle cream on the affected areas twice daily
continuously for 8 weeks. The primary endpoint of this study
was an improvement in the IGA scores. The results obtained
thus were highly favourable for ruxolitinib.
In these two phase III atopic dermatitis trials, the average
serum concentrations of RUX were minimal and did not
change any clinically important haematological parameters.
On applying the RUX cream topically, it was reported
that there is a relatively low bioavailability which aids in
the controlled delivery of the active medication to atopic
dermatitis skin lesions. This also reduces the safety concerns
related to the oral administration of Janus kinase inhibitors.
The responses seen imply that ruxolitinib might be useful in
different clinical scenarios. Not only is it beneficial in a broad
atopic dermatitis patient population with different racial
characteristics, regardless of their baseline disease condition
and severity level, but also offers to be an additional treatment
option before contemplation of systemic therapy. Because of
its effectiveness and safety, RUX cream may replace other
topical non-steroidal therapies as the industry standard.16
Delgocitinib
Delgocitinib, a pan-Janus kinase inhibitor, demonstrated
promising results in non-clinical testing studies. The topical
application of delgocitinib lessened inflammation and
promoted the manufacture of terminal differentiation proteins,
including filaggrin, to treat skin barrier abnormalities.
In an animal model of dermatitis, it also decreased skin
inflammation. Overall, atopic dermatitis symptom severity,
as measured by the modified EASI (mEASI) and IGA scores,
had improved dramatically by week 4 of a phase II study.
It is hypothesised that the JAK-STAT pathway reduces
IL-31 signalling. It can also be due to the inhibition of
neural transmission of itch via JAK pathway suppression.
These mechanisms are the most probable contributors to the
in pruritus that was seen on day 1.17 Japanese
patients with moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis who were
16 years of age or older participated in the phase II long-term
study with an accompanying extension study.18 They received
treatment for 4 weeks with either delgocitinib 0.5% ointment
or vehicle ointment, according to a 2:1 randomisation. A
24-week supply of the delgocitinib 0.5% ointment was
provided to patients who fulfilled the criteria for Part 2.
The main efficacy outcome was the per cent change in the
modified EASI score from baseline. The key effectiveness
goal for the delgocitinib group was considerably greater than
the vehicle group’s in Part 1 and the improvement continued
in Part 2.18
Nakagawa et al.19 evaluated the efficacy and safety of
delgocitinib ointment application in patients with moderateto-
severe atopic dermatitis using a variety of scales including
modified EASI, EASI, pruritus numerical rating scale (NRS),
% BSA impacted by atopic dermatitis and Skindex-16,
32, 33. There were only nine treatment-related adverse
events, with one person discontinuing the therapy due to
the side effects. Nasopharyngitis, acne, fever and Kaposi
varicelliform eruptions were the ones most reported. At the
end of the part 1 of the study (a 4-week double-blind period)
the least-squares mean percent changes from baseline in the
modified EASI were significantly greater in the delgocitinib
group than in the vehicle group (-44.3% vs 1.7%, P < .001).
The improvement was maintained in part 2 of he study (a
24-week extension period).
These results clearly outline the high safety ceiling for
delgocitinib.
Oral JAK Inhibitors
Abrocitinib
Patients with atopic dermatitis are now being tested in
clinical studies with this oral JAK1 inhibitor. In one study20
with 267 patients, those consuming 100 or 200 mg of
abrocitinib fared better in terms of the fraction of the total
number of patients who saw a significant improvement from
the initial baseline values. There were no unanticipated
safety problems; the action started immediately and it was
well tolerated. Nonetheless, at dosages greater than 10 mg,
there was a dose-related platelet drop. Even though the
abrocitinib regimen was continued, platelet counts gradually
returned to baseline after reaching their lowest point at week
4. Most side effects were mild and they are believed to have
minimal impact on the compliance given the considerably
superior results.21 This research demonstrates that consistent
abrocitinib therapy is the preferred therapeutic option for
preventing flares in atopic dermatitis cases.22 The phase III
JADE MONO-1 investigation, which involved adults and
children with atopic dermatitis, and the JADE MONO-2
study detailed the side effects of using the drug abrocitinib.
The most viusalised negative consequences were nausea,
nasopharyngitis, headache and related upper respiratory tract
infections.
One unexpected cardiac death was noted in the 100 mg
abrocitinib group; however, it was subsequently determined
that this death was unrelated to the treatment regimen.
The lipid levels were higher and the platelet counts were
lower in JADE MONO-1 and JADE MONO-2, respectively.
Unknown mechanisms underlie how abrocitinib therapy
alters the platelet count. By week 4, platelet counts decreased
after which they became normal. It could be a therapeutic
impact of abrocitinib, perhaps exerted via blocking Ashwell-
Morrell receptors. It could also be due to the suppression
of JAK1 and subsequent downstream effects on platelet or
thrombopoietin formation.23 JADE MONO-2 trial had more
Asian than European patients. The latter had diverse subsets
of helper T cell-fuelled inflammatory activity,24 which could
potentially avoid the adverse effects experienced by the
patients. The combined findings from the two studies confirm
the effectiveness of abrocitinib in a variety of patients,
probably because of the suppression of several cytokines
connected to atopic dermatitis.
Upadacitinib
Originally envisioned for oral use, this second-generation
JAK1 inhibitor was developed to treat rheumatoid arthritis.
It selectively suppresses JAK1 by a factor of 74 over JAK3,
JAK2 and tyrosine kinase 2 [Figure 4].25 At a dose of 30 mg
QD, upadacitinib showed the greatest EASI decrease and
seemed to have the optimal benefit–risk ratio. At week 16,
all upadacitinib dosages produced statistically significant
responses with EASI improvement of 50% or more (EASI50),
75% or more (EASI75) or 90% or more (EASI90) with 50%
of persons in the 30-mg group achieving EASI90 in one
trial.25 The greatest efficacies for achievement of EASI50 and
EASI75 were noticed at week 4 and remained constant until
week 16.26 which all dosage? substantially outperformed the
placebo in terms of the IGA response and patient assessments
of pruritus (improvement in the numerical rating scale).
Upadacitinib reduced SCORAD scores when compared to
placebo at weeks 8 and 16 with most comparisons showing
statistically significant results. The most often reported
adverse events were acne, worsening of atopic dermatitis
and upper respiratory tract infection; there was no correlation
between the dosage and the frequency of any adverse effect.
The FDA has designated upadacitinib as a promising systemic
therapy for the treatment of patients with moderate-to-severe
atopic dermatitis. Another investigation in the phase III stage
is currently underway.27
Baricitinib
A JAK1/2 inhibitor used to treat rheumatoid arthritis,
baricitinib was recently approved for adults suffering from
moderate to severe atopic dermatitis at 4 and 2 mg QID in
Europe and Japan.
In early 2019, Guttman-Yassky et al. conducted a promising
atopic dermatitis therapy trial using this drug. In phase II
randomized, placebo-controlled, 16-week study, baricitinib
plus topical corticosteroids were extremely efficacious
and safe for adult patients. In this study, 124 patients with
moderate-to-severe AD applied topical corticosteroids for
4 weeks before randomization to once-daily placebo QD or
2 mg or 4 mg of baricitinib (BARI). Sixty-one per cent of
patients on the 4 mg regimen met the main goal of at least
EASI improvement of 50% as opposed to only 37% in the
placebo group. Baricitinib significantly improved secondary
outcomes, including itch, sleep and quality of life. Mild
treatment emergent adverse events were nasopharyngitis and
elevated blood creatinine phosphokinase.28
Both the dosage strengths of baricitinib fulfilled the primary
outcome of improvement in vIGA (validated IGA) in
BREEZE-AD1 and AD2, two parallel, 16-week, phase
III, non-U.S. studies. BARI 4 mg met major secondary
goals in both experiments. Treatment emergent adverse
events frequencies were equivalent and dose independent.
BARI caused raised creatine phosphokinase levels in the
blood and mild headaches lasting for around 1 day, but not
nasopharyngitis or URTI.28
BREEZE-AD5 was a North American–based, 16-week,
phase III, randomised double blind placebo controlled
trial that pitted BARI monotherapy at 1 mg or 2 mg doses
against a placebo in 440 18-year-olds with moderate-tosevere
atopic dermatitis. It was found that only BARI 2 mg
achieved the primary endpoint (EASI improvement of 75%
or more at week 16). The 2 mg baricitinib dose fulfilled
practically all secondary objectives of week 16 including
vIGA-AD (Validated IGA of atopic dermatitis) of 0 or 1 and
itch NRS (Numeric Rating Scale) improvement of 4 or more.
Nasopharyngitis, diarrhoea, nausea and URTI were the most
common treatment emergent adverse events. Herpes simplex
was more frequent with the baricitinib doses (1.4% vs. 2.0%
vs. only 0.7% in the placebo group).29
Gusacitinib
Evidence suggests that gusacitinib inhibits the activity of both
Janus kinase and sonic hedgehog kinases. Thirty-six patients
suffering from moderate to severe atopic dermatitis participated
in a phase Ib study. These participants were randomized to
either consume gusacitinib or a placebo in a ratio of 3:1. Three
dosage groups – 20 mg, 40 mg and 80 mg – were evaluated
for over 28 days.30 The fraction of patients who achieved
EASI improvement of 50% or more (20 mg group 20%, 40
mg group 100%, 80 mg group 83%, and placebo group 22%)
and EASI improvement of 75% or more (20 mg group 0%, 40
mg group 71%, 80 mg group 33%, and placebo group 22%)
was greater for gusacitinib versus placebo. The mild negative
side effects that affected patients among different groups were
comparable. The study also demonstrated that many blood
biomarkers related to Th17, Th22 and Th1 immunity, as well
as SELE (the biomarker E selectin) which is associated with
atherosclerosis were successfully and significantly attenuated
by gusacitinib. In addition, the research demonstrated limited
inter-patient variability.
Conclusion
Various studies point to the fact that JAK inhibitors have
progressed by leaps and bounds in not only creating and
maintaining a disease-free state for atopic dermatitis patients
but also in becoming an effective alternative to biologics.
There are many advantages of using JAK inhibitors over
conventional immunomodulators like precise targeting, longterm
safety data, regulation of inflammatory cascade specific
for atopic dermatitis, steroid-sparing potential, personalised
treatment plans, and potential for combination therapy.
JAK inhibitors also have certain advantages over biologics,
including, availability in oral formulations, the ability
to target multiple cytokine signaling pathways, a lower
cost of therapy, the potential for topical application, fewer
immunogenicity concerns, efficacy and safety in pediatric
populations, and greater availability.
However, it’s important to acknowledge that, like any
treatment, JAK inhibitors do carry potential side effects that
require careful consideration. Available evidence suggests
they may be useful in AD care, giving patients hope for
effective and accessible medication.